Globally, R&D as a business function has a lot of literature generated and how it has evolved with improvement in the general understanding of innovation as it pertains to the competitiveness firms in driving economic growth. The time component of R&D evolution has called for innovation in the management of the R&D process. The management of R&D has transitioned from being technology-push cantered where R&D was seen as an overhead cost, and had the entire responsibility for innovation, to a networked process involving cross-border collaboration across the whole innovation system.
The primary purpose of conducting R&D is primarily to come up new or improved products or services. However, depending on the actor and maturity of the innovation ecosystem, the objectives of R&D may differ from growing capacity (i.e., mental abilities) and knowledge to coming up with new products. In the developing economies of Africa the current data suggests that our R&D performance management frameworks would need to help us establish how fast the continent is progressing towards a knowledge-based economy from factor based-economies. Despite the realisation of our position in the Innovation evolutionary timeline, there are relatively few models that program managers can follow to evaluate the effectiveness of R&D in Africa.

The general understanding the R&D concept seems to differ between developed and developing countries. From an African perspective, a lot of literature and data has been generated on R&D and Science and Technology (S&T), however, there are several unique features of the African concept that demands for a better understanding of these concepts. The emerging economies of Africa are a heterogeneous group whose innovation systems may not be yet to be elucidated and associated R&D measurement systems exhibit wide variety both internally (by region, institution, sector and even project) and internationally. 
The studies conducted over several initiatives including the 10 years’ experience of the ASTI programme as reported in the Africa Innovation Outlook 2010 and 2014 suggests some unique characteristics of R&D activities in Africa  and corroborated by the OECD Expert report on R&D in developing countries . R&D in Africa is dominated by more research (R) than Development (D) as reflected by the nature of the outputs and more than 75% of the researchers and institutions predominately from government and higher education. This suggests that unlike the OECD R&D performance measures that are premised on private sector as a driver of R&D, an understanding the R&D process in Africa would need to understand how the public sector performance can be optimised to drive the economy. This also means an opportunity for Africa to develop fit-for-purpose R&D performance frameworks and instruments to understand the R&D ecosystem better. The nature of African economies have a big contribution of informal sector which ironically is hidden from measurement, In fact, to date the instruments for measuring innovation in the informal sector is the least developed. Because of the rich endowment of flora and fauna biodiversity and prevalence of unique tropical diseases, there are special types of R&D including: traditional knowledge, clinical trials, Reverse engineering, Community development, Religious research, etc). This calls for an R&D measurement framework that is more inward looking and metrics that speak to the corresponding funding and budgeting interventions. 

Funding of R&D - Currently, our reflect R&D investment ranging 0.2% to  1.06% GERD. However, there is still more work needed in sanitisation the metrics as in some countries GERD seems to be calculated from the national budget, while the NGO funding and foreign investments are larger than the percentage funding. The governance of R&D in some countries may not be tight such that some funding by-passes that traditional accounting systems as it goes directly to individuals rather than institutions. Except for a few countries, most African countries lack separate research budget and systems to manage the budget or measure absorption capacity of the funds. Moreover, the network and crosscutting nature of innovation has not been well embedded into the ecosystem such that there is confusion between S&T and R&D budget. 

Professional Crisis - From the 10 years of experience in measuring R&D investments at continental level, several challenges in adapting the measurement instruments have come into the fore challenging the fundamentals assumptions underpinning the measurement instruments. These include: researchers with research outputs (publications) but no funding, researchers with funding but no research projects or outputs, availability of research infrastructure, validating data from conflict situations, taxi professors’ with two or more jobs resulting in contracted predominately to teach with not time for research either by design or work overload. The majority of higher education institutions are teaching universities with no significant applied research outputs. The issue of teacher-researcher who are less than expected, or very variable time spent on research, 

Because of the internationalization of research many developed country institutions (international organizations, multinational/foreign laboratories, foreign universities) have established subsidiaries in Africa (foreign antennas) where they send researchers from abroad and lots of funding. This has benefitted the local institutions through improved quality of generate knowledge products, but at the same time distorting the performance metrics.  The issue of brain circulation between the continent and developed countries creates an opportunity for designing frameworks for knowledge flows between local diaspora scientists. In putting all these characteristics of the R&D in Africa, it is apparent that more work is needed to contextualise R&D performance frameworks that speak to the dynamics of the African R&D systems and R&D practices. 

Measurement of R&D Performance in Africa
Based on some of the characteristics of R&D environment in Africa, measurement of R&D thereof, possess several challenges including: difficulty of quantifying the outcome of R&D activities especially in informal settings and public sector. Although some benefits may be monetizable (i.e., measured in units of currency such as dollars) especially in projected structures , most R&D in Africa happens in organisational functions i.e. government and higher education sectors, to which sophisticated econometric methods are needed to show value whether ex-ante, in-process and ex-post. Because of the unique R&D types, it takes long (e.g. several decades) to get data between starting an R&D effort and realization of those benefits and because of the several unknowns that cannot be measured in R&D, there is generally higher risks of failure . Unfortunately, most African governments do not have such longevity to harness the benefits of such endeavours, more often big R&D projects are discontinued prematurely.  
The Frascati manual  recommends that the starting point for a first R&D survey would entail the identification of the main R&D performers and S&T institutions (academies, associations, trade unions, journals, invisible colleges, etc.). This also requires an understanding of the working conditions facing researchers, the role of international donor and funding agencies, the prevalent sources of funds, the research outputs (publications, papers and patents), and the nature of scientific co-operation and agreements. Information on these contextual factors can contribute to the design and conduct of the survey. 
In designing the R&D performance measurement framework for Africa the performance criteria needs to meet the following guiding principles; 1) it must be chosen based on the objectives of the national strategies, national development goals, organisational objectives,  2) performance criteria must make it possible for comparison of organizations which are in the same business, 3) the purpose of each performance criterion must be clear, 3) data collection and methods of calculating the performance criterion must be clearly defined, 5) ratio-based performance criteria are preferred to absolute number, 6) Performance criteria should be under control of the evaluated organizational unit, 7) performance criteria should be selected through discussions with the people involved, (stakeholders), and 8) objective performance criteria are preferable to subjective ones  

Why do we need an R&D performance System?
R&D performance measurements need to be conducted at national, organizational, program, and individual (execution) levels and establish link across, each of these interrelated levels. The major reasons to manage performance in an organization include the opportunity provided for creating or improving accountability and transparency, user choice, customer service, efficiency, results or effectiveness, an informed means for resource allocation, and a way for showing the creation of public value.  However, ineffective performance management can be riddled with imperfections and shortfalls, including: incompleteness; over-complexity; high transaction costs; problems of attribution; unclear differentiation between quantity versus quality; opportunity for manipulation and deception; unintended distorted behavior and consequences; cyclical incompatibility; measurement degradation over time; and the inability to control for political pressures as drivers for the public programs. The Africa Performance Measurement Framework is meant to make the building blocks for measurement system of R&D in the continent. 
